Welcome to DBSCAN and HDBSCAN Clustering.
After watching this video, you will be able to describe DBSCAN, or density-based spatial
clustering of applications with noise clustering, and explain how it works.
You will also be able to describe HDBSCAN, or hierarchical density-based spatial clustering
of applications with noise cluttering, and explain how it works.
DBSCAN is a density-based spatial clustering algorithm that creates clusters with a density
value provided by the user.
The density value is positioned around a spatial centroid.
The area immediately around the centroid is referred to as a neighborhood, and DBSCAN
attempts to define neighborhoods of clusters with a specified density.
DBSCAN can discover clusters of any shape, size, or density in your data.
It can also distinguish between data points that are part of a cluster and those that
should be labeled as noise.
Density-based clustering is especially useful when working with data sets with noise or
outliers, or when the number of clusters in the data set is unknown.
Centroid-based clustering algorithms, such as k-means and hierarchical clustering, produce
spherical or convex shapes, and can work well for data sets that exhibit such patterns.
Centroid-based clustering assigns every point to a cluster, even when it doesn't properly
fit into one, like the black outlier assigned to the blue cluster.
Unfortunately, real-world data is rarely that simple.
Real patterns can have arbitrary shapes, shapes within shapes, and noise.
Density-based clustering addresses these complexities by identifying connected regions of relatively
high density.
Let's look at how the DBSCAN algorithm works.
Given a data set of points, you first select two parameters, a desired minimum number of
points, n, you want in a neighborhood, and the radius, epsilon, of each neighborhood.
Next, working through every point in the data set, you label it as one of the following types.
A core point, which is a focal point within a cluster, if it has at least n points, including
itself, within its neighborhood or radius epsilon.
A border point, if the point falls within the neighborhood of a core point, but doesn't
have enough neighbors to be a core point, or a noise point, if it is isolated from all
core point neighborhoods.
Clusters are grown from core points by including their neighbors.
Although border points are assigned to the same cluster as their associated core points,
they are not as densely connected.
Here, you can see a simulation of how DBSCAN labels points.
The data consists of two noisy sets of points created with the half-moons function from
scikit-learn.
Consider the following.
Core points are labeled in blue, and each has at least n equals 4 neighbors with its
epsilon radius.
Border points, labeled in orange, are points that belong to the neighborhood of their nearest
core point, but don't have enough nearby points to qualify as core points.
Border points exist in the outer reaches of the core neighborhoods.
DBSCAN is not iterative.
It grows clusters in one pass without updating them once they are labeled.
Any unassigned points remaining are regarded as noise.
Illustrated here is a simulation of the steps DBSCAN uses to cluster points.
The data consists of two noisy sets of points created with the half-moons function from
scikit-learn.
The sequence of plots shows how the clusters expand and how noise points are left unlabeled
at each step.
At first, all points are labeled in black and treated as outliers or noise.
In step 2, the algorithm identifies most of one of the half-moons as the blue points,
treating the remaining points as possible noise.
In step 3, DBSCAN labels most of the other half-moons as the orange points, with a few
black points left over as potential noise.
Finally, DBSCAN finds a third cluster in green, which is quite isolated from it, as you can
see from the enveloping neighborhood.
DBSCAN has done a good job of clustering the data and identifying the outlying noisy points.
HDBSCAN is a variant of DBSCAN that doesn't require any parameters to be set, making it
even more flexible than the original.
HDBSCAN is also less sensitive to noise and outliers.
It uses cluster stability, which refers to a cluster's ability to not change much when
the neighboring size is adjusted within a reasonable range of radii.
HDBSCAN measures cluster stability to find locally optimal neighborhood radii.
This results in more robust and meaningful clusters.
The technical implementation details of HDBSCAN are somewhat complex.
It is a combination of agglomerative and density-based clustering.
HDBSCAN starts by identifying each point as its own cluster, effectively noise, then progressively
agglomerates clusters into a hierarchy by incrementally lowering the density threshold.
In this way, a hierarchical tree is constructed, which gets simplified into a condensed tree
where only the most stable clusters across different density levels are kept.
Illustrated here is the result of running DBSCAN on a portion of the data set from Statistics
Canada that contains the latitudes and longitudes of Canadian museums.
The DBSCAN parameters chosen were minimum samples in a neighborhood equals 3, with
a neighborhood radius of 0.15 scaled units.
DBSCAN found around 10 clusters that seem appropriate to the human eye.
However, the population density is much higher within the red ellipse, and most of the region
has been lumped into a single cluster.
HDBSCAN has an advantage over DBSCAN in that it adaptively adjusts the neighborhood size
to reflect changes in the local densities of the points.
Here, HDBSCAN was run with a minimum number of samples equals 10, and a minimum cluster
size of 3 points.
Notice how the HDBSCAN result identified more distinct clusters than DBSCAN.
Interestingly, in addition to finding larger connected regions of varying density, HDBSCAN
tracked and distinguished connected sets of points that lie on curves.
The result looks more coherent and less noisy.
Of note is the level of detail provided in the relatively dense region in the east.
DBSCAN didn't provide the adaptive detail that HDBSCAN did here.
By tuning the parameters, you can strike a balance between mitigating outliers, capturing
the level of detail, and controlling the overall number of clusters found.
In this video, you learned that DBSCAN is a density-based spatial clustering algorithm
that creates clusters with a density value provided by the user.
Density-based clustering works well with natural patterns by identifying regions of relatively
high density.
DBSCAN is not iterative.
HDBSCAN is a variant of DBSCAN that doesn't require any parameters to be set and uses
cluster stability.
Cluster stability is defined as the persistence of a cluster over a range of distant thresholds.